Unidirectional cluster links (#18195)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/cluster_links_create.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Create bidirectional and unidirectional cluster links between LXD clusters.
---

(howto-cluster-links-create)=
# How to create cluster links

{ref}`Cluster links <exp-cluster-links>` connect separate LXD clusters.

> There are two link types — bidirectional and unidirectional — each with a different creation flow.

Reviewer: Rather than describing the links in terms of the creation flow, how about laying out the task that the user will accomplish in the guide:

```suggestion
This guide shows you how to create bidirectional and unidirectional cluster links to connect separate LXD clusters.
Refer to the {ref}`cluster link explanation <exp-cluster-links>` for additional details about these link types, security considerations, and more.
```

(howto-cluster-links-auth)=
## Prepare authentication

> Before creating bidirectional or unidirectional cluster links, set up proper authentication groups and {ref}`manage-permissions`:

Reviewer: Avoids the unnecessary capital "M", since it fits into the flow of the sentence, and ensures that the sentence will read well, even if the heading on the other page changes:

```suggestion
Before creating bidirectional or unidirectional cluster links, set up proper authentication groups and {ref}`manage permissions <manage-permissions>`:
```

```bash
lxc auth group create backup

> lxc auth group permission add backup instance <instance-name> can_manage_backups

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lxc auth group permission add backup instance my-instance can_manage_backups
```

Since this is example syntax, not command syntax

> lxc auth group permission add backup instance can_manage_backups

Reviewer 2: Is `backup` here intended to be an example group name? Just using `backup` without first creating a `backup` group gives me `Error: AuthGroup not found`. If I create the `backup` group and run this command, I get: 

```
$ lxc auth group permission add backup instance can_manage_backups
Error: Expected at least four arguments: `lxc auth group grant [<remote>:]<group> <object_type> <object_name> <entitlement> [<key>=<value>...]`
```

Author: Please see the line above.

Author: I've added the `<instance_name>` positional arg to the command as well.

   lxc cluster link create cluster_a --token <token-from-A> --auth-group clusters
   ```

(howto-cluster-links-create-unidirectional)=
## Create a unidirectional cluster link

> A unidirectional link lets Cluster A access Cluster B's resources. B creates an identity for A, but A does not create an identity for B — B cannot initiate requests to A via a cluster link.

Reviewer: `B -- B` almost looks like some sort of relationship (i.e. B-to-B). How about:

```suggestion
A unidirectional link lets Cluster A access Cluster B's resources, but Cluster B cannot initiate requests to Cluster A.
Cluster B creates an identity for A, but Cluster A does not create an identity for B. 
```

   - Stores B's addresses in {config:option}`cluster-link-volatile-conf:volatile.addresses` so A can reach B.

   Example:

   ```bash
   lxc cluster link create cluster_b --token <token-from-B> --unidirectional
   ```

After these steps, Cluster A has a link with `type: unidirectional` and no associated identity. Cluster B has an active `Cluster link certificate` identity for A and a corresponding link row.

(howto-cluster-links-identities)=
## View the underlying identities

LXD creates `Cluster link certificate` identities differently depending on the link type:

- **Bidirectional links:** each cluster creates an identity for the other. On either cluster, view the identity for the remote cluster with:

  ```bash
  lxc auth identity show tls/<cluster-link-name>
  ```

- **Unidirectional links:** only the target cluster (B) has an identity for the initiator cluster (A). The initiator cluster has no associated identity. To view the identity, run the following on Cluster B:

  ```bash
  lxc auth identity show tls/<name-for-cluster-a>
  ```

The output shows the identity with the type `Cluster link certificate`.

## Next steps

> - {ref}`howto-replicators-setup` — set up replicators to sync instances across this link for active-passive disaster recovery.
> - {ref}`howto-cluster-links-manage` — view, configure, and delete existing cluster links.

Reviewer: The replicators guide only applies to the bilateral links, right? How about either:

1. moving that cross reference up to the subsection on bilateral links, to avoid implying that this is a next step for unilateral links, or
2. writing out the sentence to clarify that it only applies to bilateral links (e.g. "After you have set up a bilateral cluster link, you can {ref}`set up replicators <howto-replicators-setup>` to sync instances ...").

You could rewrite the "manage" bullet point along these lines (this is consistent with how "next steps" are presented in the replicator guide):

```suggestion
For details about how to view, configure, and delete cluster links, refer to {ref}`howto-cluster-links-manage`.
```

Author: I'd prefer to leave as is and we can add a point on setting up image registries here.

Reviewer: Sounds good on keeping it as-is for now until the image registries set up is added, but I'd like to revisit the organization of the bullet points later.

In particular, I'd like to make sure that these "next steps" are aligned with the presentation of "next steps" elsewhere. I don't think I've seen this pattern ("Title -- sentence") often, though there may be examples.

Author: Sounds good, I think revisiting this with image registries is a great idea.

   lxc cluster link create cluster_a --token <token-from-A> --auth-group clusters
   ```

(howto-cluster-links-create-unidirectional)=
## Create a unidirectional cluster link

A unidirectional link lets Cluster A access Cluster B's resources. B creates an identity for A, but A does not create an identity for B — B cannot initiate requests to A via a cluster link.

Follow these steps:

1. On Cluster B (the target), issue a pending identity token:

   ```bash
   lxc auth identity create cluster-link/<name-for-cluster-a> --auth-group <auth-group-name>
   ```

   This command creates a pending `Cluster link certificate` identity on B and returns a trust token.

   Example:

   ```bash
   lxc auth identity create cluster-link/cluster_a --auth-group clusters
   ```

1. On Cluster A (the initiator), create the cluster link using the token from Cluster B:

   ```bash
   lxc cluster link create <name-for-cluster-b> --token <token-from-B> --unidirectional
   ```

   This command:
   - Pins Cluster B's certificate on Cluster A.
   - Calls back to Cluster B to activate B's pending identity for A.

>    - Stores B's addresses in `volatile.addresses` so A can reach B.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Stores B's addresses in {config:option}`cluster-link-volatile-conf:volatile.addresses` so A can reach B.
```
